Blog post: Fitting cubic Bézier curves (#49)
raphlinus/raphlinus.github.io: _posts/2021-03-09-bezier-fitting.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Fitting cubic Bézier curves"
date:   2021-03-09 16:10:42 -0700
categories: [curves]
---
<!-- I should figure out a cleaner way to do this include, rather than cutting and pasting. Ah well.-->
<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
	MathJax.Hub.Config({
		tex2jax: {
			inlineMath: [['$', '$']]
		}
	});
</script>
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.0/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

> Cubic beziers are by far the most common curve representation, used both for design and rendering. A fundamental problem is *curve fitting,* or determining the cubic bezier that's closest to some source curve. Applications include simplifying existing paths, efficiently representing the [parallel curve], and rendering other spline representations such as Euler spiral or [hyperbezier]. A specific feature where curve fitting will be used in [Runebender] is deleting a smooth on-curve point. The intent is to merge two beziers into one, which is another way of saying to find a bezier which most closely approximates the curve formed of the two existing bezier segments.

Reviewer: I would slightly smooth out the transition to the second sentence, maybe something as minor as,

"One of the fundamental problems when working with curves is *curve fitting*," or similar.

Reviewer: Runebender link is missing.

 I might also rephrase that sentence so that it does not require familiarity with Runebender, and just say: "One common use-case is in drawing tools, where..."

Reviewer: maybe s/most closely/best?, s/formed of/formed from?

> In spite of the importance of the curve-fitting problem and literature going back more than 30 years, there has been until now no fully satisfactory solution. Existing approaches either miss the optimum solution, are very slow (unsuitable for interactive use), or both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In spite of the importance of the curve-fitting problem and a literature going back more than thirty years, there has to date been no fully satisfactory solution. Existing approaches either fail to consistently produce the best result, are slow (unsuitable for interactive use), or both.
```

> The main reason the problem is so hard is a basic but little-known fact about cubic beziers: C-shaped beziers come in triplets of very similar shape but quite different parameters. As a result, in general when fitting some arbitrary source curve, there are three local minima. Approaches based on iterative approximation (in addition to being slow) are likely to find just one, potentially missing a closer fit of one of the others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main reason the problem is so hard is a fundamental but little-known property of cubic beziers: C-shaped beziers come in triplets of very similar shape but quite different parameters. As a result, when fitting some arbitrary source curve, there are commonly three local minima. Approaches based on iterative approximation (in addition to being slow) are likely to find just one, potentially missing a closer fit of one of the others.
```

- define C-shaped, I think
- what's a "triplet"? I would say something like, "There tend to be three sets of parameters that produce very similar shapes"; maybe "extremely" or something more emphatic in place of "very".

## How close are two curves?

Before getting into the solution, we'll need to state the problem more carefully. The goal is a cubic bezier that minimizes some error metric with respect to the source curve. But how do we measure the distance between two curves?

> One meaningful metric is the [Fréchet distance]. It can be explained with a little story. An aircraft engineer goes on a walk with their dog Pierre, and the path followed by each can be described by a curve. What length leash is required so that the dog is always within that distance of the engineer? That is the Fréchet distance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One meaningful metric is the [Fréchet distance]. It can be explained with a little story. An aircraft engineer goes on a walk with their dog Pierre, and the path followed by each can be described by a curve. What is the minimum length leash that allows both to complete their paths? That is the Fréchet distance.
```

Also note that the Fréchet distance is closely related to the Hausdorff distance, but the two can differ when the path loops back or crosses itself. For stroked curves, the Hausdorff distance is more relevant, but for filled paths such as font outlines, Fréchet preserves winding number in a way that Hausdorff doesn't guarantee.

> For solving optimization problems, the Fréchet distance is not ideal, as it effectively measures the distance of a single point, the maximum error. One can informally describe an [L2] error metric as similar, except that instead of describing the maximum length of the leash, it describes an *effort* of handling the dog which is proportional to the square of the distance of the dog from the engineer. Minimizing an L2 error means minimizing that total effort. This error metric takes into account the entire path, and thus is smoother in response to small changes of the parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For solving optimization problems, the Fréchet distance is not ideal, as it effectively measures the distance of a single point, the maximum error. One can informally describe an [L2 error metric] as similar, except that instead of describing the maximum length of the leash, it describes an *effort* of handling the dog which is proportional to the square of the distance of the dog from the engineer. Minimizing an L2 error means minimizing that total effort. This error metric takes into account the entire path, and thus is smoother in response to small changes of the parameters.
```

I try to avoid super short link stubs 🤷

I believe there is no one perfect error metric, and the choice depends on the context. Fortunately, for smooth curves such as we're likely to find in fonts, the differences between these error metrics are subtle, and we can confidently choose the one that's easiest to reason about mathematically. For this blog post, that's the L2 norm.

> Two things more to say: for smooth curves + low error, leash is generally perpendicular. Also, normalized arc length (both engineer and Pierre move at a constant speed) is a good approximation, though strictly larger.

Reviewer: is this a note to self? if not:

## Stating the problem

> Our dog Pierre has a funny quirk: he is capable of moving only along a cubic bezier path. That said, he is otherwise fairly obedient, and always starts and ends at the same position as the engineer, as well as starting out and ending up in the same direction.

Reviewer: what is "position"? I presume it is not "point", but that is how I read it.

Reviewer 2: "the same position relative to the engineer"?

Author: I think I've got it now but feel free to criticize the new version (which I'll commit soon).

Another way to state this is that our cubic bezier must match the source curve to G1. Then we want to find values for the parameters that minimizes the error norm. For a cubic bezier, the two parameters are the lengths of the two control arms; all other parameters are determined by the requirement to match the source curve.

As a mathematical simplification, we can factor out translation, uniform scaling, and rotation, and just consider a curve that goes from (0, 0) to (1, 0), with given $\theta_0$ and $\theta_1$ angles.

[image]

Then, the control points of the bezier are $(0, 0)$, $(\delta_0 \cos \theta_0, \delta_0 \sin \theta_0)$, $(1 - \delta_1 \cos \theta_1, \delta_1 \sin \theta_1)$, $(1, 0)$.

## Prior work

Having stated the problem, we can take a look at the existing literature.

* G2 geometric Hermite interpolation, de Boor. A bunch of new things here: a proof of O(n^6) scaling. The presence of up to three solutions. However, the constant factor on error is 5-10x, which is not great.

* Two approaches from the Penner paper, center of mass and orthogonal distance fitting (ODF).

* The Graphics Gems chapter.

> Also note, I addressed this problem in chapter 9 of my [thesis]. That approach gave good results but was very slow. The solution in this blog is strictly better.

Reviewer 2: how do these compare to Potrace, btw? Since its whole thing was to be a good tradeoff solution (fast "enough" + accurate "enough") for cubic curve fitting.

Author: I added a short paragraph.

## Solving the problem

> We have two parameters to optimize. A good place to start is a heat map of the error over the entire two dimensional parameter space. Below is such a heatmap for the Euler spiral with deflections 0.31 and 0.35 radians at the endpoints. The horizontal axis is $\delta_0$, ie the length of the left control arm, and the vertical axis is $\delta_1$, the length of the right control arm.

Reviewer 2: It might be useful to link out to the maths that explains how to get that euler curve segment? Most folks will never have even considered this curve type =D

Author: I linked Wikipedia, but it's not fantastic. We need an "Euler spiral segment primer" like the bezier primer :)

![A 2D heatmap of error as a function of arm lengths](/assets/bezier_heatmap.png)

Looking at this heatmap, we immediately see two things. First, there is clearly a curved line through the parameter space where the error is lower than on either side. On closer examination, the exact curve is an axis-aligned hyperbola, and we'll be able to characterize it soon. Second, along this curve the story is more complicated. In fact, for this source curve there are three local minima.

> 

Reviewer: It would be nice if this image had increased contrast or had an additional color for absolute lower bound of the range, because you have to really squint to see the minima.

Another option might be to just circle them or something?

Author: I've experimented with the colormap and upped the contrast basically as much as I could. I might fine-tune it some more, but because it's shown very clearly in the following 1D plot, I might consider it "good enough."

Reviewer 2: Hm, I'd still probably circle, or arrow, the minima because between bezier_heatmap.png and bezier_heatmap_area.png, I straight up can't see the minima we're talking about.

Author: Ok, have a new version with arrows. Thanks for the feedback :)

* Transform instances of $\delta_0 \delta_1$ into an equation of the form $a\delta_0 + b\delta_1 + c$

* Replace all instances of $\delta_1$ by its area-preserving solution in terms of $\delta_0$.

* Multiply the polynomial by $(\delta_0 \sin (\theta_0 + \theta_1) - 2 \sin \theta_1)^2$

Given a [quartic polynomial], there are both analytical and numeric solutions (the latter can still be desirable because it can be tricky to achieve numerical robustness).

In addition to the increased leverage for solving techniques, the existence of a polynomial gives us great insight into the solution space, for example the number of solutions.

### The fourth solution

A quartic polynomial can have up to four solutions, but so far we've been talking about triplets of solutions. What about the fourth?

It turns out that it's also a valid solution of the area and x-moment constraints, but not at all close to the original curve, as it contains a loop. When computing signed area, the lobe enclosed by the loop has opposite sign as the rest of the curve, and similarly for moment.

> [TODO show example]

Reviewer: please!

Thus, in the general case we can talk about a triplet of similar curves and one "nemesis" that has a different loop structure, all of which share the same area and x-moment.

## Near misses

If we only consider exact solutions of the x-moment constraint, we may miss some error minima. Consider the Euler spiral with deflections of 0.285 and 0.35 radians as a source curve to fit. The graph of x-moment and error looks like this:

![Graph of x-moment showing near approach to axis](/assets/bezier_fit_near_miss.png)

Here, on the right side of the graph, the x-moment approaches zero but doesn't actually cross the x axis.

* Optimal solution is actually near x-moment minimum.

* These solutions correspond to "surprising oval" in Penner paper.

## Conclusion and discussion

* Cubic beziers have O(n^6) scaling. This algorithm lets you realize that level of accuracy.

> * In addition to a very fast algorithm, insights into cubic beziers. The presence of triplets of C-shaped curves.

Reviewer 2: I'd probably call this a family at this point, rather than triplets: the three curves can look different enough to feel like "different curves", but they're all solutions to the same problem.

Author: The point is that they don't look different at all. All of them are within the same error bound as an O(n^4)-scaling q&d solution like Potrace. Hopefully showing examples will make this clearer.
